---
title: 'Settlements: The Community Center and Assembly Occupancies'
date: 2009-10-25T05:37:00.000-07:00
draft: false
aliases: [ "/2009/10/settlements-community-center-and.html" ]
tags : [Public Architecture]
---

You are building a settlement. An eco-restorative sanctuary for you and a certain group of people that you can imagine spending the rest of your lives with to live out your lives on, hopefully with a “happily ever after”.  
  
The land is bought. The plots are laid out. The center of the community starts to take shape and you can see the world you and your family are going to live in. And it’s beautiful.  
  
The community center has a center that is just that – a place for you and your family, and everyone else and their families, can come together to be what it is that you aim to become. You start to dream this center into existence and it too, starts to take shape before your eyes. And then, at least in North America, your dream is interrupted - by a county or state inspector whose job it is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and your building hasn’t been authorized.  
  
In the US, Canada, and Mexico, and presumedly just about every other capitalistic country, states and counties collect fees in order to protect you from yourself. These fees pay for all kinds of things you want them to do – like building roads, and a few things you don’t want them to do – like tell you that you cannot build the building your community dreams of.  
  
Community centers are, by every definition, an assembly occupancy – where people come together. That means that you must follow the International Building Code. Most communities today are using the 2003 IBC or the 2006 IBC because it is very hard to get new codes passed until other people have done it, and beaurocratic red tape on code adoption is a BEAR. One of the shortcomings of this fact is that these old codes do not (and in fact most modern codes do not) allow for “experimental architecture” on commercial structures that have the potential to endanger many people’s lives. They may let you get away with endangering your own and your families lives by allowing experimental home designs, but when it comes to the nightmare of publicity of a bunch of kids dying, no building inspector wants to imagine that. Which means, as hard as this may be to hear – no sod, no earthstructures, no cordwood, likely no geodesic domes… nothing that is not defensible in case of fire. What they will definitely allow: structural steel (which can be up to 60% recycled); maybe traditional steel or wood framing, usually timberframe (possibly, if you are very lucky, with strawbale infill); and sometimes adobe.  
  
You will have to design the entire structure according to very stringent rules. There will likely have to be a fire sprinkler. (It can be fed by the pond in some cases.) There will have to be a phone, in case of fire so you can call the fire department. There will be maximum hall lengths, maximum distances between doors, a minimum number of windows. And sometimes they’ll make you install mechanical ventilation, and electrical outlets every 7 feet. There will be sewage/septic requirements and you will have to have a drinking fountain. The building will have to be handicapped accessible. The kitchen will have to be designed. If you plan on cooking greasy foods and not just bringing cold foods and using crockpots, that means grease traps and ventilation. If you use crockpots you’ll want to have lots of counter space and extra plugs.  
  
For sizing, you’ll want to plan 15sf per occupant. That means, if your present settlement has 15 families, you’ll have to plan for 15x2 (couples) x 2 (2 kids per couple is average). Which means you’ll need a space for 60. I tell my church clients that within 2 years their size will be 15% more than they are planning for now, so plan for 69 to be sure. Multiply 69 by 15SF per person and the main multi-purpose room must be 1035SF. An office should be 100SF. Bathrooms for each sex must be included, likely 1 watercloset and one urinal for men, and probably 2 toilets for the women, depending where you are and what they’ve appended to the code. Usually one may be a unisex handicapped accessible room. So bathrooms add another 500SF. The kitchen will probably want to be at least 200SF. Now we are at 1835SF total for the building. Which luckily makes the more stringent (and boring) building types a little easier to swallow, because they cannot offer you this type of flexible space in most cases. Though, and I cannot emphasize this enough, you can borrow lots of techniques from the building types you love, like earthships, to make this space really sing for you. It doesn’t have to be your standard building-in-a-box architecture. A creative builder will help you find ways of making it perfect for your group. In most cases, a builder/general contractor will be required for the foundation and framing. All else you might can do with licensed electricians and plumbers involved.  
  
You are going to need a good architect to help guide you through it all, and sign and submit the documents. It will cost money – at least 8% of your project budget, and better architects can charge up to 15%. And oftentimes, they deserve it. – often the money they can save you in the long run is far more than what you’ll spend for them in the short run. Get them involved early and make sure there is not only a “green” in their resume but a real heart connection that you hope will be a life-long one. Be absolutely sure they share your vision. A good professional is just waiting for something that inspires them. You’ll know. But be sure they can mind the business of code, and the business of opening hearts. Because the house you surround yourself with, whether it be personal or public, will be a vessel for what it is you want to create. Make it a beautiful inspiring vessel. It can be done, even with an inspector over your shoulder.